Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o’clock one
morning, a train on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching
the latter city at full speed. The morning was so damp and misty that
it was only with great difficulty that the day succeeded in breaking;
and it was impossible to distinguish anything more than a few yards
away from the carriage windows.

Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from
abroad; but the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly
with insignificant persons of various occupations and degrees, picked
up at the different stations nearer town. All of them seemed weary, and
most of them had sleepy eyes and a shivering expression, while their
complexions generally appeared to have taken on the colour of the fog
outside.

When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages
found themselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both
were rather poorly dressed, both had remarkable faces, and both were
evidently anxious to start a conversation. If they had but known why,
at this particular moment, they were both remarkable persons, they
would undoubtedly have wondered at the strange chance which had set
them down opposite to one another in a third-class carriage of the
Warsaw Railway Company.

One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with
black curling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad and
flat, and he had high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly
compressed into an impudent, ironical—it might almost be called a
malicious—smile; but his forehead was high and well formed, and atoned
for a good deal of the ugliness of the lower part of his face. A
special feature of this physiognomy was its death-like pallor, which
gave to the whole man an indescribably emaciated appearance in spite of
his hard look, and at the same time a sort of passionate and suffering
expression which did not harmonize with his impudent, sarcastic smile
and keen, self-satisfied bearing. He wore a large fur—or rather
astrachan—overcoat, which had kept him warm all night, while his
neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a Russian
November night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a
large cape to it—the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the
winter months in Switzerland or North Italy—was by no means adapted to
the long cold journey through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.

The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six
or twenty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very
fair, with a thin, pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were
large and blue, and had an intent look about them, yet that heavy
expression which some people affirm to be a peculiarity as well as
evidence, of an epileptic subject. His face was decidedly a pleasant
one for all that; refined, but quite colourless, except for the
circumstance that at this moment it was blue with cold. He held a
bundle made up of an old faded silk handkerchief that apparently
contained all his travelling wardrobe, and wore thick shoes and
gaiters, his whole appearance being very un-Russian.
